.\" This is the manual page for testcloud.
.\" Contact lruzicka@redhat.com if you find an errors or a typo.
.TH TESTCLOUD 1 "11 Nov 2020" "1.0" "testcloud man page"
.SH NAME
testcloud \- download \fIqcow2\fR cloud images and boot them locally.
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBtestcloud\fR [-h, --help] [COMMAND]... [OPTION]... [SUBCOMMAND]... [OPTION]...
.SH DESCRIPTION
.LP
\fBtestcloud\fR is a small helper script to download and boot cloud/coreos images
locally. Testcloud supports wide range of distributions, namely Fedora, Fedora CoreOS,
CentOS, CentOS Stream, Red Hat Enterprise Linux, Debian and Ubuntu.

\fBtestcloud\fR can run either in system mode or in constrained user session mode,
which is usefull for running it eg. in unprivileged containers.
.PP
To run \fBtestcloud\fR, you need to provide the \fBURL\fR of a cloud image or string in \fBdistribution:version\fR format
to the script which will be used for booting.

If you do not have an image location of your own, you can use one
of the images from the \fBFedora Cloud\fR download pages at \fIhttps://alt.fedoraproject.org/cloud/\fR.
.PP
Then, \fBtestcloud\fR will download the image and save it in the \fI/var/lib/testcloud/backingstores/\fR.
It will use this image to create a backing store for a newly created instance which will be placed in
\fI/var/tmp/instances/\fR. When the same image has been previously downloaded, \fBtestcloud\fR will NOT
download it again and it will use the current image to create the instance.
.PP
When the new instance is created, \fBtestcloud\fR will show its IP address that you can use to
access the running instance via \fIssh\fR. The login name is \fBfedora\fR and the password is
\fBpassw0rd\fR. The IP address of an instance is shown when you list the instance (see COMMANDS).
.PP
The instance can also be manipulated and controlled with \fBvirt-manager\fR.
.SH CONFIGURATION
The default configuration should work for many people. However, if you need to override the
default settings, you can do it in the \fIsettings.py\fR file. The example file in
\fIconf/settings-example.py\fR shows the available configuration values which you can
alter to suit your needs.
.PP
The configuration file must be placed in one of the following locations in order to be
recognized.
.IP
\fIconf/settings.py\fR in the git checkout
.IP
\fI~/.config/testcloud/settings.py\fR
.IP
\fI/etc/testcloud/settings.py\fR
.SH COMMANDS
\fBimage\fR
        Control and manipulate the images (see OPTIONS) for more details.
.SH OPTIONS
\fB-h, --help\fR
        Shows the help message and exits.

\fB-c CONNECTION, --connection CONNECTION\fR
        Provide the URL of a remote libvirt instance to be used instead of the local one. This option can be used with the \fBinstance\fR command only.

.SH SUBCOMMANDS
\fBcreate\fR
        Create a new instance. See the INSTANCE CREATE OPTIONS section for more details.

\fBlist\fR
        List available running instances and images. Use the \fB--all\fR options to list all instances.

\fBstart\fR
        Start an existing instance.

\fBstop\fR
        Stop a running instance.

\fBreboot\fR
        Force the instance to reboot.

\fBremove\fR
        Remove an instance or image. If an instance is running, it cannot be removed without the \fB-f\fR option.

\fBdestroy\fR
        Remove an instance or image. Deprecated, do not use.

\fBclean\fR
        Remove non-existing or unsynced libvirt VMs from testcloud.

.SH INSTANCE CREATE OPTIONS
\fBURL\fR
        Specify the URL from where testcloud should download the instance qcow2 image or distro:version handle. \fBThis option is compulsory\fR.
        Some examples of supported short urls:
        - fedora:rawhide (latest compose), fedora:33, fedora:latest (latest Fedora GA image)
        - fedora-coreos:next, fedora-coreos:testing, fedora-coreos:stable
        - fedora:qa-matrix (image from https://fedoraproject.org/wiki/Test_Results:Current_Cloud_Test )
        - centos:XX (eg. centos:8, centos:latest)
        - centos-stream:XX (eg. centos-stream:8, centos-stream:latest)
        - ubuntu:release_name (eg. ubuntu:focal, ubuntu:latest)
        - debian:release_name/release_number (eg. debian:11, debian:sid, debian:latest)

\fB-n, --name NAME\fR
        Set desired instance name. A nice and memorable name will be generated for you if not specified.

\fB--arch ARCH\fR
        Set the desired guest architecture. Host arch is the default, supported are: x86_64, aarch64, ppc64le, and s390x.

\fB--ram RAM\fR
        Set the amount of RAM that will be available to the instance's VM (in MiB).

\fB--vcpus VCPUS\fR
        Set the number of virtual CPU cores to be assinged to the VM.

\fB--disksize DISKSIZE\fR
        Set the disk size of the instance VM (in GiB).

\fB--vnc\fR
        Open a VNC connection to the \fB:1\fR display of the instance VM.

\fB--no-graphic\fR
        Turn off the instance VM's graphical display.

\fB--timeout TIMEOUT\fR
        Specify the time (in seconds) to wait for the instance boot to complete. To disable waiting time (default behaviour) set to \fB0\fR.

\fB--disk_number\fR
        \fB:\fR To provide disk number you want

\fB--nic_number\fR
        \fB:\fR To provide nic number you want

\fB--virtiofs\fR
        \fB:\fR To specify a local directory to mount and mount target like <host path>:<guest path>

\fB--iommu\fR
        \fB:\fR To provide virtual iommu device

\fB ADDITIONAL COREOS OPTIONS\fR

\fB--bu_file BU_FILE\fR
        \fB:\fR To provide a bu_file you want to use

\fB--ign_file IGN_FILE\fR
        \fB:\fR To provide an ign_file you want to use

\fB--ssh_path\fR
        \fB:\fR To provide a ssh pubkey path you want to use

.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Create a new instance:
.IP
\fBtestcloud create <URL>\fR
.PP
List all available instances:
.IP
\fBtestcloud list\fR
.PP
Start an existing instance:
.IP
\fBtestcloud start <instance_name>\fR
.PP
Stop an existing instance:
.IP
\fBtestcloud stop <instance_name>\fR
.PP
Remove a running instance:
.IP
\fBtestcloud remove -f <instance_name>\fR

.SH SEE ALSO

\fBtestcloud's help\fR and the Project's \fBREADME.md\fR file

.SH BUGS
No known bugs. If you have found a bug, please report it at \fIhttps://bugzilla.redhat.com\fR.
.SH AUTHOR
Mike Ruckman (roshi@fedoraproject.org)
